# -Qiu-Fazu-Biography
https://alchetron.com/Qiu-Fazu Qiu (1914-2008) left China for Germany in 1936 to study medicine. He graduated from the University of Munich with his Ph.D. in 1939 and received his license to practice. In 1940, he was given a position as a supervising doctor at the university hospital when he encountered Koenig (1922-2013), a university student. By all accounts, it was love at first sight. While Nazi Germany did not treat the Chinese poorly, interracial marriage was still illegal and dating was not easy. Qiu was stopped by the Gestapo during a coffee date and had to be bailed out by his professor. Qiu and Koenig secretly married during the War and only officially married in 1945. Koenig's parents were supportive and helped them conceal their relationship.  An incident during the War is worth noting. In 1945, the SS were marching Jews from Dachau as U.S. troops approached the camp. When Qiu found out that there were some 40 Jews outside of his hospital, he ran out to check on them. Seeing that they were in no condition to continue, he insisted to the SS that the prisoners had typhoid and that they must come under his care. He and the nurses, including Koenig, then rescued the Jews by hiding and nursing them in the hospital basement. For this incident, Germany will give the two of them numerous honors. But more on this later.  In 1946, Qiu wanted to leave for China. At the time, Qiu and Koenig already had the first of three children and had established themselves in Germany. They sold everything, including their car and house, and moved. Koenig adopted the name of 裘罗懿 (pronounced “Qiu Luoyi,” with "Louyi" based on "Loni"). Qiu would later give this explanation: "I have to return. Our noses are flat and our skin is yellow. China is our real home. Although I enjoyed a high status in Germany, and was trusted and treated well by the doctors I supervise and by my patients, I still have to return."  When they arrived at China, they were not even able to buy formula milk given the rampant inflation at the time. However, they toughed it out. Qiu brought back important surgical skills to a China with nothing of the sort. In 1951, Qiu participated in the Korean War as a doctor for Chinese troops. When he returned from the War, he served as a professor in both Shanghai and Wuhan. During this time, Koenig took care of their three children. Ultimately, the family settled in Wuhan. In 1958, Koenig became the first German to adopt Chinese nationality in Communist China, and Zhou Enlai personally approved her application. Koenig herself would be appointed to teach medicine. She also established a German language center in Wuhan.  As was the case for Huang and Rhys, the Cultural Revolution meant hard times for Qiu and Koenig. Qiu was sentenced to clean toilets and Koenig, who also lost her teaching position, was stuck wrapping cotton swabs at the hospital. Qiu described life as follows: "I have to write an essay of self-criticism every night. When it was cold in the winter, my wife would set up the coal stove, knit, and accompany me. In the summer, she would sit next to me and fan me to chase away the mosquitoes. She would still fan me even after I fall asleep." When Qiu was sent to a far-away farm village for reeducation, Koenig followed him there and raised vegetables and chicken to make his life a little better.  Life would go back on track in the 1970's. Qiu went on to become one of the foremost Chinese surgeons and the forefather of organ transplant in China. He even served as a deputy to three National People's Congresses. (I would not bother reciting his very long list of achievements.) As I mentioned, Germany did not forget what Qiu and Keonig did for the Jewish prisoners. In 1979, when Qiu and Keonig were visiting Germany, there was an offer to have Koenig's German citizenship restored. She declined, stating that she was happy in China. In 1985, Qiu himself became the first Asian to receive the Federal Cross of Merit.  At home, Qiu and Koenig had a modest but warm family life. Every day when Qiu returned home, he would whistle in front of the building so Koenig would run to the window and greet him by throwing him a fruit. Chinese, German, and English were freely used at home. Koenig taught the children to play piano and violin, and and the family often held recitals. Of the three children, the daughter studied medicine in Germany and, as far as I know, still practices in Hamburg. One of their two boys also studied medicine in Germany, and works now in China as a doctor and a medical professor. The remaining boy did not join the family trade. Instead, he received his doctorate in engineering from the Technical University of Munich, and works in China as a business executive for a German automotive company. The three of them all had successful careers.  Koenig suffered from Parkinson's in her old age. Qiu took personal care of her, even when he was 90 and was still working. He gave her massages while making her laugh with jokes in German. Qiu passed in 2008, a day before her birthday. (You can get a sense of what a big deal Qiu himself was by looking at the pictures of his funeral, which was well attended by students, patients, and dignitaries: http://news.cnhubei.com/ctjb/ctjbsgk/ctjb02/200806/t347802.shtml.) The children did not want to traumatize their mother with the bad news, so they lied to her that he was out seeing patients whenever she asked for him. Koenig herself passed in 2013. Near the end of his life, Qiu would remark about their happy marriage: "if there is a next life, we will still marry each other."  To end this post, here are some Chinese accounts of their lives: http://news.cnhubei.com/xwhbyw/xwwc/200806/t345389.shtml http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_4a994b1d0101d0cu.html https://tieba.baidu.com/p/665787392 http://www.hust.org/forum/A0/p0/html/968.html https://news.tongji.edu.cn/classid-16-newsid-7529-t-show.html  Here are some English sources: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2483852/ http://en.people.cn/200508/03/print20050803_200072.html  There is also a German autobiography that Qiu wrote: https://www.kopp-verlag.de/Qiu-Fazu.-Ueber-mich-selbst.-In-meinen-eigenen-Worten.htm?websale8=kopp-verlag&amp;pi=B2114381  You can find pictures in the above links. You can also search Google Images with their Chinese names, 裘法祖 and 裘罗懿. It feels strange for me to post the names of their children. However, they made no attempt to hide their own information and it is trivial for you to find out more yourself.
